SALES ANALYSIS
24 July, 2024

Overview
This is one of my few data analysis project showcasing a comprehensive Sales Analysis dashboard, to analyze and visualize the sales data for providing key insights or trends of a company's sales performance and activities. By leveraging Tableau Public data visualization tool, this dashboard demonstrates a clear and concise view of sales metrics from the time period between 2020 and 2023.

Inspiration
My fascination for data analysis, and storytelling arise from a deep interest with how data can unveil information and approach on to make strategic decisions. Having an electronics background and completing a master's in IT, I started exploring the world of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML), which highlights that the data is crucial to generate valuable insights or to design optimized models. By employing this project, my enthusiasm helped to uncover insights or patterns that help stakeholders or businesses to improve sales strategies.

Key Insights & Findings
1. Total Sales, Profit and Quantity: In the dashboard, it provides summary of total sales, profit and quantity for the year 2023 compared to the previous year (2022). In the visual charts, it shows an increase in total sales by 20.4%, profit by 14.2%, and quantity sold by 26.8%.
[Screenshot of Total Sales Page]

2. Monthly Sales and Profit Trends: To visualize this a line chart is used to illustrate the trend of sales and profit over the months of 2023, with notable highlights for the highest and lowest months. This visualization helps to identify seasonal patterns and peaks in sales performance, similarly in profit and quantity performances.

3. Product Subcategory Performance: A bar chart compares the sales and profit (or loss) for different product categories and sub-categories from timeline between 2020 to 2023. This comparison highlights which subcategories are performing well and which are under-performing.
[Screenshot of Product category & Subcategory]

4. Weekly Sales and Profit Trends: The step chart below indicates the weekly trends in sales and profit, with average values. Weeks with above and below-average performance are highlighted to draw attention to significant deviations.
[Screenshot of Weekly sales & profit trends]


Technical Details
For this project, I have utilized a powerful data visualization tool, Tableau Public, to incorporate several advanced features such as::
1. Floating containers: to organize the dashboard layout and ensure a clean and structured presentation.

2. Filters: applied filters to refine data and allow for detained analysis based on selective years, products (such as categories & sub-categories), and location (region, state, and city).

3. KPIs: KPIs were designed to visualize overall sales, profit and quantity performance.

4. Charts: To compare year-over-year sales and profit, a bar chart was designed. Likewise, a line chart to illustrate weekly trends.


Purpose
This dashboard's sole purpose is to present an overview of sales metrics and trends to analyze year-over-year sales performance and effectively understand the trends inside it. This project is also my first attempt on learning Tableau tool, which provides me the opportunity to explore how this tool works. I have gained valuable insights into data analysis, by analyzing the sales data, specifically including skills like data visualization, KPI development, trend analysis and how to create an interactive dashboard.
[Screenshot of Whole complete dashboard]

Insights
1. Overall Sales Performance (2023): $ 733K in total sales, shows a 20.4% rise over the previous year (PY). $ 93K in total profit, with a 14.2% increase compared to PY. A total of 12K units of quantity were sold in all, marking an increase of 26.8% over PY. As indicated in the KPI charts, it is important to know which months have highest and lowest sales to understand seasonal trends and plan marketing strategies.   

2. Profitable Subcategories:  Phones, Binders, Chairs, Tables, Storage, and Accessories were profitable subcategories. And subcategories that sustained loss or were less profitable were Machines, Appliances, and Bookcases. This comparison makes it easier to see which products are doing well and which require modification or reconsideration.

3. Weekly Trends: The average weekly sales varied between $ 14K to $ 15K and there were notable differences between profitable and less profitable weeks, averaging about $ 2K. The weekly or seasonal trend information can guide for promotions or discount strategies.


Future Improvements
I am planning to expand this project by incorporating another dashboard for customer analysis. This additional dashboard provide deeper insights into customer behavior such as repetitive orders, and regional sales patterns, that can further enhance the analysis and help to develop targeted sales strategies.